# Top 5 Heroku Alternatives
Heroku is an immensely popular platform as a service (PaaS) provider, but naturally it cannot support the use cases of all applications and developers. Issues surrounding server location, pricing, and a [recent security breach](https://status.heroku.com/incidents/2413), have had developers seeking alternate solutions to this platform. 

There are many PaaS providers, and this article will function as a guide to choosing and using PaaS for the production of a web service or application. A PaaS is an environment which manages the development and deployment of an application in a cloud. 

Some advantages in using a PaaS is the infrastructure it provides, like servers and storage as well as services like database management, automatic scaling, and debugging tools. It can save a lot of coding time as the code components needed to run on a platform, such as security features and workflow, are created and managed by the provider. Another advantage of a PaaS is the fact that pay structures often allow for a pay-as-you-go scheme. This enables developers to push their application to production without a large upfront cost.

This article will explore five alternatives to Heroku: [Code capsules](https://codecapsules.io/), [Google app engine](https://cloud.google.com/appengine), [AWS Elastic Beanstalk](https://aws.amazon.com/elasticbeanstalk/), [DigitalOcean App Platform](https://www.digitalocean.com/), and [Engine Yard](https://www.engineyard.com/). This article also provides short setup guides and links to tutorials on deploying through each of these providers.

## Code Capsules 
[Code Capsules](https://codecapsules.io/) is a full platform as a service which allows for the deployment of both front-end and back-end applications. Code Capsules advertises ease of use as they allow an application to be pushed to production through a git push command to GitHub. The application is run on a server, called a capsule, which pulls the code from the GitHub repository and builds it within a container created on their website. This means that, once your application is set up in your GitHub repository, all it takes to deploy your code is a git push command. Code capsules is one of the few PaaS providers that provides servers in Africa and Asia. This makes it an excellent choice for developers and companies outside of the US or EU. Another advantage, for teams working on applications, is the organisational tools Code capsules provides. On the Code Capsules website sections called Teams can be created that allow multiple users to collaborate in a set of Spaces, each of which can contain multiple Capsules (the servers which run the applications). This team and project-based setup provides an organisational structure which is ideal for a collaborative workflow.

### Setup
To deploy your application with Code Capsules:
First go to the [Code Capsules website](https://codecapsules.io/) and create an account. Confirm your email address and log in.
One the Code Capsules website, go to edit profile in the menu and select the GitHub option. From there you will be instructed on connecting a GitHub repository to your account. 
Next create your organisational structure by creating teams, spaces, and capsules. To deploy an application from a capsule first we must create a Team, a space within that team and then a capsule within that Space.
Next, choose what type of application to deploy (front-end, back-end, or data capsule). Choose which product you would like to make use of when deploying the application, each has its own pay structure. Select the GitHub branch you wish to deploy from and push to production. Now you can visit your website by clicking the “Live Website” link.

## AWS Elastic Beanstalk
Elastic Beanstalk is an Amazon Web Service solution to the deployment and scaling of web applications and services. It supports languages like Java, Python, Ruby, and more. To deploy your app through Elastic Beanstalk all it takes is to upload the code from the AWS management console, a command line instruction, a Git repository, or direct from an IDE. From there Elastic beanstalk manages several operations automatically, like capacity provisioning, load balancing, automatic scaling, and more. Developers can access these services to customise the experience for the product. Services like a private cloud, or a relational database, can be added through configuration of the web application. The pricing of the use of Elastic Beanstalk is based on the application's use of the resources needed to maintain the application by other Amazon Web Services. 

### Setup
There is a [tutorial](https://aws.amazon.com/getting-started/guides/deploy-webapp-elb/) on the AWS website that demonstrates how to deploy a web application with Elastic Beanstalk. In this tutorial a NodeJS application is created and deployed through a terminal. Common mistakes in deployment are also walked through in this tutorial. 
## Google App Engine
Google App engine provides a fully managed and serverless platform for web applications and products. It includes administration for the management of a web application. The platform supports code written in languages including Java, Python, Ruby, JavaScript, and more. If code makes use of a language that is not supported, custom containers can be utilised. These containers use a variety of languages and frameworks which can be chosen for specific projects use cases. Once the code has been set up it can be deployed from a terminal using $ gcloud app deploy. After deployment Google App Engine will automatically upload code files and run the code within Google’s cloud service Google Cloud. App engine scales applications automatically to meet the requests required. The payment structure charges only for the resources that an application uses. A notable feature App Engine provides is the ability to host two different versions of an application to allow for testing and feature rollouts. 

### Setup
To deploy an application on App Engine start by creating an account with Google Cloud. Google cloud provides 300 USD in free credits to deploy, test, and run your application for no charge. Next, on the Google Cloud homepage, find the option to create a Google Cloud project. Follow this [short tutorial](https://cloud.google.com/appengine/docs/standard/nodejs/create-app) on how to deploy an application to the App Engine. After creating your application, deploy the code from the command line using the ```gcloud app deploy``` command and view the live application online using the ```gcloud app browse``` command.
## DigitalOcean’s App Platform 
DigitalOcean’s App Platform provides a fully managed platform for app deployment. A selling point for App Platform is its simplicity of use. On their website, Digital Ocean claims that there should be no need to take a course to learn how to operate a platform. They seek to achieve this simplicity through an intuitive UI and UX. Another feature of Digital Ocean’s simplicity is the capability to deploy an application from a git repository. Languages and frameworks like Python, Node.js, Ruby, and more are supported. However, if an application is outside of these languages, it can still be utilised by providing a container image. App Platform oversees the management of operating systems, databases, infrastructure, and more. Costs are optimised according to the scaling of your application to ensure that savings are made when the application is not using a lot of resources. App Platform also allows for both vertical and horizontal scaling to ensure that applications can handle spikes in traffic. App Platform also provides deployments with no downtime. This means that changes can be rolled out or applications can be scaled while keeping the application available and operational.
### Setup
After creating code and pushing it to a git repository it can be deployed from the [DigitalOcean website](https://www.digitalocean.com/). Here you can follow a [tutorial](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-deploy-a-react-application-to-digitalocean-app-platform) on deploying a simple application. After creating an account connect it to a GitHub account. Next, connect to a repository from the GitHub account. Choose a server region and the branch from which the application will be launched. Choose whether to auto-deploy changes made to your code and configure your application. Finally, select a payment plan and launch the code. After the application has been built it can be viewed by clicking the “Live App” link on the dashboard.

## Engine Yard 
Engine Yard is a PaaS that seeks to oversee the operational overhead that can be experienced when using an infrastructure as a service like Amazon Web Services. Each Engine Yard account has 24/7 support from a team of AWS architects. This support team provides tailored stack recommendations for each application. Deploying from Engine yard is a straightforward process of connecting code from a git repository, which is then analysed by Engine Yard and is run on Kubernetes clusters. The application’s maintenance, backup, recovery, and updates are all managed by Engine Yard. Web applications are deployed continuously to allow for availability during the deployment process with zero downtime. Automatic scaling allows for web applications to optimise resource use and performance.

### Setup
To deploy from Engine Yard first create an account and click the get started link in your dashboard. From there connect to a git repository, name the application, select a framework, and click “create application.” Next, set up a git deploy key and add it to the GitHub repository. Finally, create a new environment for the app. Choose a name for the environment, region, time zone, then boot your environment. A step-by-step guide can be found [here](https://support.cloud.engineyard.com/hc/en-us/articles/205407628-Set-Up-Your-Application-and-Environment).

Overall, a PaaS should provide an efficient and cost-effective solution to the deployment of an application. Match the suggestions above to a project’s specific use-case to find the best fit for deployment. Consider the scale of the application, the location of its users,  the payment structures, and security requirements to ensure that a PaaS can properly support the production of the application.

